[Music]
all right thomas chatterton williams
what is up dude thank you so much for
joining me man um just went through both
of your books and actually how many
books have you published
uh i've published two and i've thrown
away uh one novel that i worked on for
three years
that's interesting uh fiction
yeah yeah um right after losing my cool
came out in
2010 i began working on a novel
that uh i guess after three years of
labor i realized was kind of
ill-conceived or i didn't have at the
time
the skill set that i needed to make it
what i wanted it to be so then
i had a i had a my daughter was born i
put the novel aside and i was like i
have to make a living again so that's
when i started writing the next book
so i have to ask what was what was it
that you were trying to do what was the
novel about
the the problem was it was
it was a piece of fiction that was
inspired by an event that actually
happened it was actually about a
shooting that happened on long island in
2006 i want to say
where um it was a kind of standard
ground shooting where an upper middle
class black family
lived in a mostly white an italian
neighborhood and
late at night
some white teens came to the property to
beat up
with bats
the son of the homeowner there
and he approached them in the driveway
and ended up shooting um one of the kids
he was um
sent to jail and convicted and then
governor patterson uh
commuted his sentence and so this was
kind of like um the factual basis that i
tried to imagine a slightly different
story with but i found myself maybe it
was coming from just having written a
memoir and and thinking very
factually about my own life i found
myself kind of stuck in the facts of the
story and not able to get into that kind
of
uh realm of imaginative play that i
think you have to do to really write the
best fiction and
and then you know it's easier kind of i
learned this the very painful hard way
it's easier to toss a project and start
again than it is to kind of revise some
things that seem permanent to you in a
piece of writing
that's really interesting so i don't
know how much you know about my
background and everything but um so most
people think of me for what you and i
are doing right now which is interviews
conversations
but i actually
my mission the thing that i'm totally
focused on is fiction like a hundred
percent and i should say 98 and then the
two percent which is what i become known
for is the part that um honestly i was
doing just as a way to gain attention
for what i was going to be doing on the
fiction side so i went to film school
got my degree in film graduated this is
late 90s and it'd be actually really fun
to talk sort of 90s hip-hop that whole
culture obviously you come at it from a
very different perspective than i do but
i was obsessed and um
so graduate no idea how to make a film
and
this is all pre-youtube so if you wanted
to make even a no-budget film you're
talking about a hundred thousand dollars
and i did not know anybody that had seen
that kind of money so i had no idea how
to raise money i had i just literally
even had to get an agent just seemed
utterly beyond me and it was the
catch-22 of if you want to direct a film
you have to have already directed a film
and it was like well how how the hell
does that work and so i had hoped that
going to film school was going to give
me that that um
the project to show people that i could
handle it but i ended up totally
screwing up my senior thesis film and it
was just an abomination and so now i'm
super stuck
long story short because my audience has
certainly heard this many times but
decide on not on a whim but like
basically to go get rich so that i could
make my own films and have money right
like it'd just be so easy and i actually
right you know super simple and i
thought that it would take 18 months it
took 15 years but it actually worked so
now i'm i'm like actually trying to
build that studio and and i'm thinking
okay now that i know what i know about
marketing and i'm trying to
because
almost no matter how much money you've
you've made there's not enough to build
a film studio
you're gonna have to like tie into the
industry it's just way too expensive
and
in trying to get into that i thought
okay within my skill set like what do i
have that would allow me to
be interesting to open doors to connect
with people and um so that's why i
started doing well i should say i
started doing this to communicate to my
employees and then saw the opportunity
to spin it out into something bigger as
like a marketing vehicle um so
when i heard because you actually
mentioned in your book that you were
writing a fiction book i didn't realize
you'd officially thrown it away but i
thought that's really interesting in
terms of voices people that
i hope will come up with something to
even speak to what we're going through
now is
my my theory my hypothesis is that you
can go a lot farther with
fiction which hits people hits people at
the limbic level instead of the the sort
of logical part of the brain
and if you can get them in that emotion
like you can convey something that you
can't convey in a more
you know memoir or a full frontal sort
of logical assault
do you plan to pick that back up
um yeah i always kind of i tend to agree
with you i always kind of had this idea
of
um a writer
um the the figure of the writer that i
always like really admired and wanted to
emulate were like the people like james
baldwin or albert camus these are people
who
didn't really
think of themselves as being limited to
any genre they could write a play they
could write a novel they could write a
piece of reportage they could write a
nonfiction collection of essays and and
the important thing is they had ideas
and they had a kind of artistry about
how they transmitted those ideas and so
that's the kind of writer that i uh i
aspire to be but
um fiction was a little bit harder than
not hard i don't want to say harder it's
a it's a different mode of expression
and i think you have to learn how to
change gears and you have to um
understand uh what's demanded from you
in a particular project um and so i
think that i was probably just not um i
was i was super young when losing my
cool came out and i think i just didn't
have how old were you when you wrote
that
uh like 26 27
whoa dude i was like
27 year old in terms of like i had lived
abroad for a year i had spent two years
working as a paralegal then i went to
grad school for journalism and i sold
losing my cool while i was still a
student i had published like one
op-ed in the washington post and then
suddenly i was writing a book and i kind
of learned how to write a book as i was
writing it and then i thought i could
just
go straight into a novel but i think i
needed to just
like season or marinate a bit more
before the fiction would feel there's a
way that fiction writing
because you're creating the whole world
out of nothing i'm sure you know this uh
it has to have a kind of density that um
in non-fiction writing can be filled in
with just the facts you know and and i
and so i felt it just didn't achieve
this kind of
um
it didn't have the kind of weight that i
thought i could get with uh non-fiction
writing but i'm i'm hoping that i'm
hoping that i'll get there i feel like
writing is one of those things where
you're not as good as you want to be
until you can no longer write
whoa that yeah i'll definitely agree
with that um one of my favorite quotes
uh is from seth godin and he says you
know people tell me all the time i'm not
a good writer and he's like awesome show
me your bad writing and he said that
nobody ever can produce anything because
they're paralyzed they're afraid they're
going to be a bad writer they write a
bad sentence or a bad paragraph and then
they just stop
and they just don't recognize that yeah
sure some of your early stuff is going
to be bad um so obviously i had written
sort of at the film level or sorry film
school level and then i had written
screenplays outside of that
i'd even been paid to write screenplays
at one point but when i came to writing
my first comic book under my own company
i was like whoa man i took 15 years off
like building the business was
extraordinary but i literally put my
artistic life on hold i stopped watching
movies like everything that was like
supposedly what i was building towards
to get good at business i had to [__]
shut it off man i just had to like
really pour myself into
um that world and in doing that just
wasn't pushing myself forward as a
creative
and that ended up being
more difficult to get back into
than i wanted to be true but i was just
like you have to do this you have to put
it out you have to just have deadlines
hit your deadlines get it out and yes to
some extent you're going to like cringe
at you know page one hopefully is worse
than page 100
but if you don't clock that time if you
don't tell those stories and see where
the edge of your skill set is
you know you're just never going to move
forward yeah totally and i think that um
uh page one actually in my case ended up
being way
too good compared to page 100 because i
had like refined page one for the course
of three years over and over and over
again every day i would start writing i
would just rework what i had already
done and so like the beginning was
extremely possible you know nothing's
ever wasted my father uh always
emphasized this to me
um
parts of that novel
what i was saying was that i wasn't
getting the imaginative space i needed i
was kind of stuck in the realm of
of my own experiences too much but part
of those passages that i thought i was
um putting in the voices of characters
they were actually my own experiences
and and a couple scenes made their way
into self-portrait in black and white
as my own kind of experiences and
memories of my father so nothing's
wasted and i think that um there's a lot
of merit in learning
what your limits are what you can't do
as well as what you can do and it kind
of
um it it's all grist for the meal it's
all it's all like
a means for moving forward i wanna i'd
love to pick back up you mentioned your
dad
he is
a very prominent figure in both of your
books
and seems like a super interesting guy
is he still alive
he is my dad is turning 83 this summer
whoa um
rad story so one of the things that i
found most interesting in your book is
is the sense that identity is malleable
which is an obsession of mine um i agree
aggressively agree and one of the things
when i was so i did i've worked in the
inner cities a lot both as like
i don't know i guess you could call it
sort of social working i was a big
brother for a kid for eight and a half
years grew up in south central los
angeles black kid and that was my first
four inch i came from like almost
almost rural tacoma washington
and um coming and spending time in like
south central property because i went to
usc so usc man is in the ghetto like you
are legitimately like you go two blocks
and when i was there was far worse if
you went two blocks off of campus it was
crazy and so i used to go and tutor him
and then he ended up moving to compton
so i was going back and forth to compton
and then i ended up having a facility
that was like right on the edge of
compton had a thousand employees who
grew up hard as hell
and so spending a lot of time in that i
really became obsessed with this idea of
like there are people here that are far
smarter than i am meaning like if the to
define intelligence is the ability to
process raw data quickly i was like they
can process data faster than i can
but i've been more effective in my life
by sort of worldly standards than they
have and why
and that's when i got obsessed with
mindset but a huge part of mindset is
identity like how do you view yourself
and i remember one of the kids coming to
me and saying dude like this is crazy
because i was trying to get him to read
which of course is something your dad
was like super forceful with you about
trying to get him to wreak i'm like
there's so many ideas you don't
understand like you've got this crazy
perspective that's really limiting you
so
getting people trying to get them to
read and then trying to get them to
think of themselves differently as being
like
your your brain can learn whatever you
pointed at but kid came to me and said
you know this is crazy you help me read
all this stuff totally different
perspective love it and he was like my
mom once said to me the world doesn't
want someone who looks like me to
succeed and i was like god like that's
so
the way that that a hundred percent and
i was like dude i get it your mom does
not mean ill a thousand percent but like
you can't ever repeat that to yourself
ever again because it's doing this weird
thing where it's you're not taking the
actions that you could be taking like
even if the world is working against you
right
you're not you're still not taking the
actions that you could take to make the
best of that situation which your dad to
me was like holy christ what an amazing
example
give people a little bit of background
on your dad and then like what he how he
raised you guys which i think is utterly
fascinating
yeah my father is um
you know he's the most inspiring person
that i
um
have been around but he was also like in
my neighborhood he was like a figure and
beyond my neighborhood he was like a
figure of inspiration to like a lot of
uh people who came around our house a
lot of he mentored a lot of my friends
and
and um he taught he taught a lot of kids
who would come to study with him he
has a phd in sociology and by the time
that i was born he was no longer working
in
anti-poverty programs which is what he
did
in the 60s and 70s
but
by the time i was born in the 80s he was
running basically like
something that it doesn't do it uh
justice to call it like sat prep he was
students would come to study with him in
our house and they would like sit in the
living room with him and they could
study for their sats for their gres if
they were at that stage for the lsat but
they would often study in subjects like
physics calculus philosophy literature
and he was kind of like
um
he became like a kind of a guru figure
for like a lot of students um a variety
of ethnicities and backgrounds and
social classes but we ourselves
money was never there was a lot of
education in my house but money when i
was growing up was never abundant so my
father
was born in 1937 in segregated texas uh
never knew his own father
and um his mother uh
was 17 when he was born so he kind of
had to raise himself in the way that he
figured out that he would transcend his
own
um circumstances was through book
learning he got that idea in his head
very early um tell me about that how how
did he get that idea like to me the move
you've seen the movie the matrix
oh yeah so in that movie they talk about
the the first guy who pulled himself out
of the matrix i'm not that guy like i
did not pull myself out i'm not that guy
either that's my dad he pulled himself
out of the mate
like what was did he ever tell you like
what connected for him
he says that you know he was profoundly
aware
that he didn't have a kind of parental
structure he knew that he was alone very
early and he was he says that in you
know he lived in a segregated
neighborhood but uh you know it was also
there was he reminisces finally on
aspects of this there was like class
diversity in his segregated neighborhood
not everybody by any measure was poor
um and somebody was having a garage sale
and getting rid of books and he was a
six-year-old seven-year-old staring at
the books and the guy gives him a beat
up copy of plato's dialogue he said and
he told me
six or seven is what that's like the
foundational story in my house is that
my dad received early on plato's
dialogues from a neighbor that was
tossing it and had no idea what he was
reading but he became obsessed with the
idea that
it was through books that he would like
transcend his circumstances and
very quickly like his people told him
like
don't read actually they were like
you're going to get up above yourself
it's going to cause you trouble
um and they put in kind of dark terms
that like a black boy wasn't really that
wasn't really his place so he would
actually hide in his closet with a
flashlight um and a candle and read
um books until they made sense and like
aesop's fables were extremely important
for him
really really fast before you move that
i i wanna one thing that you said in
your book that really [__] hit me
when was when your mom said you
you don't know how your dad grew up he
used to have to hide in the closet with
a flashlight to
read man that that's like you want to
talk about something i take for granted
like my my family all but
it was just assumed you're going to
college like they never said if you go
to college it was like
yeah
it's so interesting so sorry keep going
i just that moment really hit me in the
book
i mean you put it the bet
that he pulled himself out of the matrix
and he was the first in his family to
get any sort of education post-high
school
and it ended up getting a doctorate in
sociology and
he instilled
in me the idea very early on that i
could
and
also kind of ought and must
pursue the life of the mind you know he
was very into sports and he
um encouraged athletics to us but but
the idea was that you have to cultivate
your your mind especially
if reading or writing comes easy to use
and you know pursue that and he named me
after a poet thomas jefferson
um and kind of incepted in my brain very
early that uh that being a writer was
not something foreign to my identity
that you talked about identity before
that i could be this that i wore the
name of a writer and that um if i liked
writing that should be something that i
could do and i thought that was i i
thought about that a lot in recent years
because i've i've i'm a father twice
over now i have a six-year-old daughter
and an almost two-year-old son
and it's such a gift to give somebody
a belief in themselves you know um to to
to naming is such an important
thing
that we do
and so much of who you think you are
does derive
from the identity that you wear um
and like i guess you know it's a corny
name where i grew up thomas chatterton
it was it was definitely something that
got me teased in school but also in the
back of my head it was
you know an awareness that
um
that i wore the name of a great writer
and
it's interesting
that specific writer though is
interesting the story at least you tell
in the book i had never heard of thomas
chatterton but the story that you told
about your dad sort of calling out to
you and saying do you know who you're
named after
and it was like a child prodigy right
who ends up killing himself at 17
because people didn't believe that he
actually could write that well do you
ever ask your dad why that poet of all
the poets
i did and his answer was really
interesting he said that i had you know
his he said that thomas jefferson who
was fatherless when his dad died when he
was very young and so he grew up very
poor
and lost any kind of the social benefits
that he might have had and was you know
reduced by his class to what felt to my
father as a kind of a very black or a
metaphorically black existence you know
he had no network capital capital no
social capital but he had ambition drive
and some wits and um he wrote
extraordinarily well and he
was so young that people didn't believe
that the writing was his and so he in a
sly way he started publishing these
extraordinarily polished poems and
saying that he found them
in the um in the church in the attic of
the church where his father was
employed before he died and people
believed that he was finding these kind
of um
uh amazing doc medieval documents and uh
and then once they found out that they
were not actually medieval documents
then he got this reputation of being a
forger
and um it's unclear how he died actually
my father the the main story is that he
like in despair drank arsenic and killed
himself and he became this kind of
symbol of um neglected genius for the
romantic poets and there's a beautiful
painting of him in the in the tate
gallery in uh in london where um it's
called the death of chatterton and it's
this beautiful boy um in his
terribly crappy apartment uh who's just
poisoned himself
but i've actually been to bristol
england where he um
where he grew up and i've been talking
with members of the thomas jefferson
society because i got obsessed with this
and the prevailing theory now is that
actually he wasn't that desperate he was
actually pretty good with the ladies and
he had contracted syphilis and was
trying to cure himself and drank
something that went wrong but in any
event the reason why my dad named before
him was because um you know he said he
felt that he had a very tough life and
that um
and and that we often name
our children after
great men and wealthy men and important
men but he wanted to name me after
somebody
who didn't have that kind of prestige he
wanted to name me after somebody that
maybe if i wore his name i would i would
i would bring honor to that name
wow that's intense man i love that how
did you decide to name your own kids
um
my wife now my wife disputes this my
wife and i
[Laughter]
we love the wire and we love the name
marlo and you know she's french and i'm
american and we were trying to find
names that would that would be
pronounceable uh on her side of the
family and on my side of the family and
so that eliminates quite a few um for
both english and french um and marlo
just it works in both languages and uh
we like the idea of giving a girl a kind
of masculine name
um and then like why tell me tell me why
that's interesting
i'm not sure i think that there's just
something about uh
not being bound
you know
i think i really do believe that naming
um
influences personality and there's
nothing wrong with having a
hyper-feminine name but i thought that
it's kind of interesting to give a girl
that uh
she's
ambiguous racially she's ambiguous in
national
terms
and
and you know she has a she has a name
that if you see it on a piece of paper
you wouldn't exactly know
uh if the boy girl she's unpin downable
in in certain ways i i just i thought
that there was something to that that i
liked you know
um
and i just like this kind of in my mind
i always think of i always think of the
wire when i think of her name
that's cool i know um at one point you
had considered giving her a very
different name
i forget the exact example that you used
in the book
why did you guys end up moving away from
that
what was the name that you guys were
going to call her
so i was
in a way i was kind of thinking that it
would be
um
a kind of way to push back against uh
the kind of notions of respectability
that are forced on you and also you know
just it would be a kind of
way to step out of the
the racial component of naming i was
going to give her
her i was
thinking about giving her a
stereotypically quote-unquote
stereotypically black name
um
especially considering the fact that i
mean to get into this we'd have to talk
about the fact that um my father's black
my mother's white
my wife is
blind her blue eyes
and there was a high probability when
she was pregnant i was starting to
realize that
that that our children it would be
difficult to
see that
they wouldn't project a kind of
phenotypically black
presence in the world and so i i toyed
with the idea of giving her a kind of
culturally black name but ultimately um
my wife just rejected that not out of
the
feeling that the name wasn't good but
out of the idea that like it's a lot to
put on
like kind of
challenging society's preconceptions is
a lot to put on a young kid especially
in a foreign country where people aren't
even going to understand what that's in
reference to so that's very interesting
we came back dude marla
that that is the thing that i find so
interesting about your story is um
you're now living in france and the way
that that gives you perspective on race
relations in america which having only
grown up in america you you sort of
think oh this is what it's like
everywhere and then for you to be sort
of looking back on the outside and
seeing something different how has your
sense of all of that changed like i
remember so my wife is british and i
remember i was in england one time and
trying to be respectful i referred to a
black guy there as african-american and
my wife starts pissing her pants with
laughter she's like he's not american
and i was like oh my god it it had never
occurred to me
what i was actually saying that that
that was so specific to my country and
you've talked about how race is
local or geographic i forget the exact
term used um
but your story really brings that into
stark relief
yeah so
it was i've lived in america for 30
years and i've lived in france for
almost 10 years and
in america
i'm read as like
essentially a light-skinned black dude
in france i'm often mistaken for being
an
arab same features same kind of i'm
still myself but
who i think of myself as being
and what my local culture reads me as is
not what i'm necessarily read as here
and it does impact the way that you
begin to see um the necessity of your
racial identity there is nothing to say
there's no necessity to it it could be
otherwise if you move elsewhere it may
very well be otherwise um
and so you know i just i started to
unpack the
the whole um
i guess what i'm trying to say is that
living in france
there's a very specific black white
binary that obtains in america it has
nothing to do actually with the amount
of melody in your epidermis it's a way
of reading people and categorizing them
that is that is um
very much rooted in the in the history
of uh having slavery within our national
boundaries and having an idea of
whiteness that has to be kept pure and
so that's why you can have
even children who look like my children
blonde haired blue-eyed
very light-skinned children you could
in southern states until relatively
recently in our nation's history those
people could quite easily and with no
cognitive dissonance be called negroes
and they could be even enslaved in in
certain times because race is actually a
lot of things beyond just
any set of physical features or any
ancestry
it took me kind of stepping out of the
american the all-american
skin game that stanley crouch calls it
to see the specificity of what america
does with race and then as i started to
to think about it and study it and think
of this book and think of the ways that
my children were challenging the notions
of of the black white binary that i grew
up with um you know you look at a place
like brazil and brazil is almost the
exact opposite of america in america one
drop of black blood has traditionally
held to make somebody
black in brazil a drop of white blood
makes somebody not black so you can have
a superstar footballer like neymar
whose darker skin than i am same kind of
hair texture as i have
who
anywhere in america would be a black guy
you can have him sit down for an
interview and and people ask him if he's
experienced racism
in soccer and he says
i've never experienced racism it's like
it's not like i'm black or anything like
that
my dad's black i'm not black you know
you it's the exact opposite way but in
america you can have the president of
the naacp
present is wider physically than you do
because it's the exact slip the script
is flipped in in france uh they're not
accustomed to thinking of race
in terms of
if you have a drop of black blood that
would dominate your identity to the to
the exclusion of your other ancestry so
i've found myself in so many
i just when i first moved here i found
myself in so many conversations where i
was explaining the logic of the one drop
rule to europeans who
were neither into it or not into it they
just had never thought that way before
and as i tried to explain the logic of
it it seemed less and less compelling to
me
that was even before my daughter was
born
that's that is super interesting one
thing you said in the book that um man
because i don't have kids i've never
really thought about but you're like you
become your children as much as you are
your parents and grandparents and i
thought whoa that's [__] interesting
so
um
your kids does your son does he look as
white as your daughter
uh i would say he could even potentially
look uh whiter than she does
here is a bit curlier than his yeah
yeah so that's interesting we have we
have friends that we visit sometimes in
sweden when my kids go to sweden
uh they can blend in completely with the
local population it's like
they're really really blind here yeah
that that is really interesting
given that they're what a quarter or
one-fifth
i mean they they would be um
i did my dna so my my dad like most uh
black americans who um
descend from southern slaves is not 100
descended from africa because there was
so much
genetic mixing in the south but he's
about 80 percent which is right on
average for um
for the population of americans deemed
black
my mother's about fully um northern
european and i'm about
or so northern european descendants so
my my kids are like 20 something like
like low 20s
in terms of
strictly west african
ancestry
but to look at them very few people very
few people anywhere
can see that
there's something that i see but but but
most people that they don't read them as
having any kind of
um any kind of blackness visible
blackness in them
yeah that's and that's really i want to
be clear i'm not saying that they make
me white i'm saying that they shatter
my belief
in um these
categories of having real and important
um walls around them um i don't believe
that you can be a different race than
your biological child or your or your
biological parent it seems absurd when
you actually live that um
so that's when i say that your children
reach back and change your identity i
mean something that uh made sense to me
a a jewish friend of mine told me
there's a saying
that
a jew is not somebody whose grandparents
are jewish a jew is someone whose
grandchildren are jewish and i thought
about that a lot and i think that there
is something
in there that speaks to
an understanding of the malleability
of lineage and that you have to guard
against if you care about preserving
whatever you consider to be the purity
of a group then you have to guard
against the very very very easy ways in
which it can fall apart because it is
actually not
we are all mixed and as soon as you get
outside of like the kind of um control
of the fences then then that mixness
rises right back up to the surface
are you paying attention to what's going
on in the us right now
very much though yeah
very much
yeah it's
it it is
very surreal to sort of be in the middle
of this and to see it kick off and
um i'm curious to
where do you think this goes like where
do we go like my obsession is how do we
how do we get a beautiful outcome
what is a beautiful outcome right and so
i'm always telling people start with the
goal man what is the goal but if you
can't define the goal in a single
sentence then then we're in real [__]
trouble because you won't know how to
steer towards that
and i would be very curious to hear like
what people think is the single sentence
description of what the beautiful
outcome
is you
say is actually something that not
enough people do say which is what is
the end point we would actually like to
achieve what what is our vision of the
society we would actually like and then
how do we for the steps in between where
we are now and
and that vision
for me
clearly the vision
of a society i hope to get to is one in
which
the color of your skin the color of your
eyes
means as little as we attribute to the
color of your hair that that your
physical appearance
gives me as little information about who
you are
what your loyalties are what your
affinities talents abilities
capital social capital what any of that
is i want i want
race to recede from
being a salient aspect of our
of our life together
i want to live in a functioning
multi-ethnic society where these
differences
aren't really
important what i'm afraid we're moving
towards even as
we may be making great strides like i'm
very inspired by the kind of
conversation that suddenly almost um
unbelievably possible right now about
police reform that's that's
extraordinary the kind of progress we've
made in the debate about
um
police brutality in the past two weeks
the willingness i mean mitt romney
marching in washington with black lives
matter i mean that is that is something
but i am very afraid that um
the kind of mood on the left is not one
of getting into a society where
racial um identity differences mean less
but actually that they become reified
and and more important
that everybody kind of
um
you
cannot transcend your whiteness your
white privilege is something you
constantly have to be aware of and my
blackness is not something that i can
transcend
um because the nation is fundamentally a
white supremacist project and it cannot
not be all we can do is kind of get into
a
truce or something
that terrifies me uh france is certainly
not a perfect society but the
fundamental principle here is what they
call the republican ideal that there is
there are no
um
separate groups that everybody in france
is french now is that the case in
practice of course it's not if that's
that that has to be the that has to be
the horizon towards which we want to
move i think
um
and so i'm both i'm both like motivated
and uplifted by what i see in the states
right now and i'm also very concerned
yeah i think that that's a a pretty good
summation when when this all started
going off i was like
yo like this could really be that moment
of change like people are so focused on
um you know how we find that way forward
but there's some weird undercurrent of
like one of us one of us like you have
to [__] say a certain like party line
and my thing is that that just isn't how
progress works so the irony is about i
don't know two months ago i wrote a
document for my company called the
physics of progress and
what i meant was how do you
how do you make a more thriving business
like what is what is the science of that
like removing all of the vague intuition
like hey we should probably focus on
this hey we should probably try that
it's like
you just end up in chaos how do we like
how do we boil this down to just what is
it what what is true like what is true
regardless whether i want it to be true
you want it to be true whatever anybody
thinks like just what is [__] true
like we we are in a grounded reality
even if this is a [__] simulation the
simulation has rules right so this is
like coded [__] so like what what do you
really actually have to do in order to
make progress now when i say i did not
think anything cultural about that i was
just like what what test do we run to
get our cost per acquisition down like
how do we test to improve our thumbnail
quality to get our views up like what
are the metrics and and what does that
all look like
and let me tell you usually the thing
you think is going to work has second
and third order consequences that are
surprising and you never saw it coming
so it's like okay look
you don't know anything you have an
informed hypothesis rad i love it like
get as much data as you can form a
hypothesis but the whole like i even put
in this document i put the very like
webster's dictionary definition of what
a hypothesis is and the punch line is
basically this is your best guess it's
something you think might be true it's
worth like pursuing but you don't
actually know and it's like that that's
how we make progress you have an
informed hypothesis your best guess but
then you test it and the idea behind
testing it is then you have some metric
by which you say either we made progress
or we didn't and it's like if you don't
have all of that if you don't have the
end state that you want right we talked
about goals earlier if you don't have
the problem if you don't understand the
problem that you think stands in the way
of that a hypothesis on how to overcome
that and what i call lever actions like
what are the things you actually do it's
not a feeling or a vague idea it's you
[__] do it you abolish police
you defund police you create a new
police force you um you know do
something that changes the legalities
around it like whatever like what what
is the very concrete thing that you were
going to do and then what metric is that
designed to impact if it's number of
police brutality if it's graduation
rates if it's single parent families
like well i'm open i don't [__] know
what the answer is i'm just saying like
this is this is the physics of progress
like there is going to be a metric you
care about that you think is either the
end state that you want or the leading
indicator to the end state and then you
[__] run the experiment and you see
did i get the result i wanted yes or no
if you got the result then you keep
going down that vein your hypothesis was
correct if you didn't get the result
that you wanted or something you didn't
expect or there's some knock-on effect
that goes somewhere that oh [__] i
wasn't expecting that then you [__]
start over with a new informed
hypothesis hopefully better informed
because at least it may have been a
mistake but at least you have new data
and you do this over and over and over
but if you're only allowed to put forth
certain ideas and everything else is
[__] taboo then it's like we're we're
not gonna make progress because that
that just defies the physics of how
things get better
you're absolutely right yeah and i don't
that's what makes me very concerned
about this moment i i don't know
if
i'm i'm not sure if it's conscious or
not conscious i don't know if everybody
wants to make progress the way that
you're
that you define it i think that
there's a lot of catharsis in the moment
there's a lot of um
justified anger there's some resentment
there's there's
a desire to
um
i think
keep people on the hook or keep the
country on the hook in certain ways but
not necessarily to get
just to that better outcome
and that's it and and and and to measure
how far we've come because we have come
quite a far away i mean i was horrified
by this video
but
this is not actually
the america that my father grew up in
it's just not we've made extraordinary
progress uh
uh yeah he had to sit in a closet with a
flashlight to read
it's like and i mean just
obviously that is the most minor of
minor examples of what sounds like a
brutal
not just because his aunt was just a
eccentrically
mean lady it's because she worried
somewhat justifiably
that
people in the
racial caste society
could be offended by an overly bookish
black woman that there could be physical
consequences for that i mean she she had
that fear rooted in a kind of
state-sanctioned racism that we have
progressed out of uh i don't mean to say
that the society doesn't have
extraordinary racial problems that are
um
really really disturbing especially when
you see them from abroad and you're kind
of outside of the
the craziness of america i just mean to
say that
if you're not measuring if you're if if
if you take this kind of
absolutist line of critique that america
is fundamentally a white supremacist
society and almost can't almost
irredeemably so
and that white supremacy um will be the
kind of governing logic so long as
there's an america
then i'm not sure that you want to
you want to make a better society so
so much as you just want to have that
kind
of that indictment recognized and
validated
and then you seize on you seize on
events that reinforce that narrative and
you might dismiss
countervailing
evidence that could indicate
a more optimistic outlook
yeah that that would be a um
that would really be heartbreaking um
but i for a second
wanna talk about
there's an intoxication to rage
there's a certainty in rage
that in my life i have glimpsed precious
few times i'm not a guy who gets angry
very easily but when i get angry i
realize there's i don't feel cowardice
like there have been times in my life
where i feel cowardice and i'm like
man if i could just get mad about this
if i had righteous indignation all of
that would go by the wayside and you
actually quoted malcolm x in your book
and i wrote it down there's so many
[__] quotes in your book dude that i
wrote down it took me like twice as long
to read your book because i was
transcribing so much of it um
but the quote wasn't i'll paraphrase i
won't get the exact quote but um
when you step on my toe you
you forfeit your right to tell me how
how to get you off of it or when you
step on my foot you forfeit the right to
tell me how to get you off of it and i
thought
yeah
yeah like if if if
you perceive that this is an in deemably
um
racist society and it can't be redeemed
racist society excuse me um
and you have been held down by that
[__] flip the board man like they're
while i actually
i want to get to where the conversation
is more around class which you again
quote in your book you say something
along the lines of forgive me i'm
paraphrasing again but oftentimes in
america we talk about race when what we
really mean to talk about is class
and i thought [__] yes dude because so
much of the work that i've done in the
inner cities i've dealt with probably
more hispanics than i have
african-americans so i'm like
i see the same sense of like why i can't
do anything with my life what do you
mean like there's that sense of like
of just
all this raw potential but nobody is
pointing them in a direction where they
can turn that into a skill set which to
me is the great like
loss the the just the hemorrhaging of
human capital is because people aren't
put on the path of turning potential to
skills
we waste extraordinary uh quantities of
human capital in america uh james
baldwin wrote very eloquently about
what does it mean when a ninth of the
country is just
never even expected to amount to
anything
uh it's just pragmatically wasteful
if you want to have the best nation you
can have
but to your point about race in class
i really do think that the kind of um
the blanket of identity that we throw
over every single
issue
um sometimes is useful but oftentimes it
obscures uh
deeper realities that we might need to
address if we actually wanted to make
progress so george floyd wasn't it's not
simply that george floyd um was a black
man who was killed by the police he was
a poor black man who was killed by the
police uh that matters that he was a
poor black man he died over a
counterfeit twenty dollar banknote that
doesn't happen to you if you've uh had
opportunities in life uh to have gainful
employment um
he he
uh from what i understand was out of
work
after the coronavirus kind of shut the
economy down you know
he wasn't able to have the kind of
savings that a middle class
professional would have that would get
him through that i'm not saying
that you can extricate his blackness
from whatever was going through uh
officer
chovin
chauvin or chovin or however you
pronounce his name derek joven's mind
but
i am saying that i
don't know of any a situation where uh
where
uh not poor where where a professional
black man has has met that fate
uh i'm not aware of the case of that so
um today you have uh in missouri you
have a 25 year old
white woman who was shot at an
intersection by a police officer and
killed that story i read this morning in
the kansas city star
it's not a viral story
about a thousand people are shot uh
per year in america which is an
extraordinary number when you consider
that like 55 people have been uh killed
by police in wales like in the 21st
century you know
um
you know for real like a thousand uh
americans are shot per year and killed
um
and about 500 of them are white
about 250 of them are black
disproportionately the police kill black
people but in total terms the police
kill an extraordinary amount of white
people this woman this 25 year old woman
was shot in her car killed she was
headed to work a night shift
at a convenience store she was a poor
she was a four white woman you know
i can't think of any well-to-do white
person that's been shot and killed by
the cops the police
in america
brutalize
overwhelmingly poor people of all
ethnicities
the group that gets um
disproportionately killed by the police
more than any other is native americans
much more than much more the numbers on
that are terrifying it's like
six to two right
for every
it's um
it's like 10. for native americans uh
like 10 out of
i said i don't have the number it's like
um
i think i'm quoting your book it was um
for every
six night of americans there was two
um african-americans killed if i
remember right it was it was jarring
that i'll i'll leave it at that
the exact number it gave me but it's
blacks are twice as much as whites and
native americans are almost twice as
much as blacks
yeah that that's
so going back to the physics of progress
the
my thing is okay
well if if we want to solve the problem
first we have to figure out what's
generating the issue right so there's
there's a lot of things going on so
there's real racism just like straight
up racism and then there's police
brutality which is a separate issue
maybe co-mingled and intermingled
certainly at some points but not others
poverty to me is
and this this is a bias of experience
for sure it's just that's the thing i've
encountered so much
i spent a lot of time um
with people that have really struggled
to generationally struggled to get out
of that and seeing
the and this
to a hammer every problem is a nail this
is very much that for me i am well aware
of that but um because to get my own
life turned around i had to address
mindset i've just spent so much time
learning about the brain learning about
how to think and then how to apply that
into action and all of that and how you
can turn your life in different
directions because of that um and when i
it's funny there was a time where i
would talk about this stuff so openly
and just never got pushed back and i
know now i'm going to start getting
pushback on this but what i used to i
have been saying this for years i've
never gotten a negative comment about it
and now watch this video is going to be
replete with them
but
generational poverty has everything to
do with the mind and very little to do
with money
so it's like you could go from like my
level of wealth is
is unrecognizable to my family to in
fact
ironically one of my cousins just found
out like three weeks ago
that i'm wealthy she had no idea and she
she was on the phone like with my mom at
first she thought my mom was joking and
she just like kept going but the kid who
was lazy the kid with big ears like
she's like that's who we're talking
about right and my mom's like yes yes
yes he's been very successful and she
was just like what she couldn't
understand so my family for you know as
sort of as far back as you go is
and lower middle class like that's sort
of where my family hung right
i did not grow apart i did not grow poor
but it was like
where i've come now is so
different than where my family has been
for as you know as far back as we know
how to go um so it is
the amount of change that you can make
in a single generation from parent to
child is
is pretty staggering so when you see
that people aren't escaping that and
then and this is the core part of my
thesis i want people to hear
you said oh god i forget the words you
just said it too just like from a
functional level the society that you
want to build you should be what i call
mining for astronauts so imagine this
you've got this white kid i've had this
encounter with the inner cities through
this kid that i big brothered for
and so but i'm very young so i'm i think
i started with him when i was either 18
or 19
and so by the time i lose contact with
him i'm only like 26 so i'm i was a late
bloomer so for me it was like i'll call
that the sort of dumb period of my life
so i was really ineffective at helping
him the one solace i take is i showed
him somebody loved him and he did not
have that until that moment so i'm very
proud of that um but that's sort of my
only encounter with that and then as i
get older and i start um
this company and it happens to be in
manufacturing manufacturing will put you
in the worst neighborhoods wherever you
are so it puts me in sort of compton and
compton adjacent and i'm now meeting
people unlike anybody that i had grown
up with
and as i'm going through this i'm like
i believe and i say to anybody who knows
me i believe it doesn't matter who you
are today it matters who you want to
become and the price you're willing to
pay to get there okay
well
thomas chatterton if that's true why
don't you hire people with convictions
with felony convictions nobody will hire
them hey you're in a bad neighborhood if
you put that word out you get a lot of
people and i was like
yeah let's do it so we put out on the
street hey we will hire people even if
they we will consider someone for
employment you still have to be a badass
[__] but i will consider you for
employment right i'm not hiring just
anybody but i'll consider you for
employment even if you have a felony
record we had people lined up around the
building
and they were coming in so i ended up
having former drug dealers i had this
one guy who was a drug dealer at that
moment he was trying to use me as a
front for his drug money it dude this
but this
this guy is one of the most
extraordinary humans i've ever met in my
[__] life so he comes in and we we
were growing so fast with so many
employees or people coming to interview
i was having to interview people
multiple at a time now i'm like the only
white kid i used to refer to myself as
the crazy white kid so i've got all
these hispanics black people and me and
so they're coming in to interview and in
the middle of this interview he's
[__] mad dogging me like crazy and i
realize you and dude this is a guy i did
not grow up tough i'm not a tough guy at
all but i knew if i was gonna [__]
survive in this environment where i was
around gang members hardcore
[__] like i really had to be on
my a game so anyway he's mad dogging me
and i'm like i know if i back down this
is going to be a problem so either i
just get him out of there but there was
something you know how he can just see
in somebody's eyes like this [__]
guy's bright so i'm looking at him and i
point at him in the interview and i'm
like you you've got anger management
problems and his [__] jaw dropped on
the floor and i said come with me for a
walk
so i'm walking with him and
he was like i have to know how you did
that and i was like did what and he goes
how did you know that i have anger
management problems he had driven to the
interview from an a court appointed
anger management class and i was like
dude the way you're looking at me it
doesn't exactly take a rocket scientist
to figure out that you're like an angry
dude and he was like that's [__]
crazy it's crazy and i was like look man
because he he started to get really
nervous and he was like there's
something i have to tell you because i
was like if you want this opportunity
i'm gonna give it to you i can tell
there's something about you and he was
like oh there's something i have to tell
you and i said look i know you you've
been arrested right you've been arrested
for drugs you've been arrested for
violence what is it and he was like yes
you know and and i've served my time but
i'm out and i said look we i don't care
about that
don't ever bring that [__] on my floor
but if you come and you work hard like
[__] yeah man like i'm really trying to
do something here so he comes in anyway
er we i earn his trust and he begins to
tell me like what his life really is
like and he was like yo this was just
supposed to be a front for my drug money
but he was like you're opening my eyes
you're getting me to read all these
books he was like this is [__]
amazing and so i started asking him
questions about drug dealing and i'm
like this [__] guy is an
extraordinary entrepreneur
and i was like
you you sell risk though and i'm like i
get out of this business immediately i
said it's as stressful as my life as an
entrepreneur has been no one has ever
shown up with a shotgun to steal my
protein and they had shown up at his
house with shotguns to try to take his
drug money and his drugs and i was like
it's too [__] dangerous just get out
like use these talents and skills
anyway he ended up having an
extraordinary career with us has
continued to go on and do amazing things
after us and so i i become this is a
long long story to tell you i become
obsessed with this notion that i call
mining for astronauts
and i was like i don't know why i called
it that but i was like the next [__]
elon musk the next einstein is here in
compton but they will never do anything
with their life because they're just
pointed in a direction that doesn't make
any sense people are telling them no one
wants you to succeed people are making
fun of them for reading books like this
this same kid that i just told you that
story got in a [__] fist fight
because he started reading books and i
was like
what like that was so bizarre and so
foreign to me i i just couldn't imagine
so i'm like whoa this is the whole an
auroboris you know the dragon eating its
own tail
i'm like you're never going to hit
escape velocity if or best way to say it
crabs in a bucket
if people pull you down for trying to
educate yourself
where do you go from there
so anyway all of that was about like
there are extraordinary humans and if
you want this ideal society and the next
elon musk or or um einstein really is
there the things that they can create
that they can build but you have to you
have to uplift them and so that has
become my obsession so with my skill set
how do i uplift people
in that situation
you know i mean like example is so
important he
needed to see what a successful business
successful legal business was right he
had to get in your door
and be exposed to how you were making
your business work and i think that part
of what is so powerful about poverty is
that you're never exposed to somebody
who's doing something that you may not
even know you want to do but that you
could do very well and that's kind of
what i was talking about when it's just
like
i was never around anybody who was a
professional writer
in the way that i ended up wanting to be
but my father gave me some kind of
confidence that made it seem plausible
to me i think that what poverty can do
is just through lack of exposure
is just crush your
crush your sense of plausibility
um
and so
yeah i mean what you're talking about
when you're mining for astronauts you're
talking about um
the the simple fact that no
one group has any monopoly on talent or
genius and and when we
only favor certain groups in certain
classes we throw away just as many elon
musks
that are naturally born in the world as
as are found and in the world to do
well-educated classes is crazy it's a
terrible way to govern a society
it's a terrible way terrible way to
govern a society to get what you want
but the only thing i care about is what
the [__] is the way out like like how do
you really so honestly
my my the irony of ironies is
my
professional life starting
i don't know four years ago five years
ago was
how do i take somebody who is um
who is
actively antagonistic
to a growth mindset
and help them change
do you know jeffrey canada
yeah okay i'm [__] obsessed with this
guy i gotta get him on the show because
it is entirely possible that i have made
a mythology of what he actually thinks
and believes and i talk about this guy
more than just about any human on the
face of the earth um and
he in my
interpretation of his work what i heard
was which is why i'm so eager to ask him
directly is give up on adults
and go after kids
and it's like dude sometimes and and i'm
now playing with an idea that is beyond
my wisdom i i would need to explore this
more and so this is one of those i don't
i don't know if i'm doing the right
thing right now certainly for my
business by talking out loud and dealing
with ideas that i'm not yet capable of
wielding well
but i'm not going to ever get to the
point where i can wield them well if i
can't talk about them so
bear with me
but when i think about like
how we really begin to
get out of this scenario and
build mindset
for people who are antagonistic and
going younger and trying to plant ideas
at the age of imprint like that's
that's everything that i've oriented my
life to and the thing that i'm not sure
that i'm playing with well because that
part i think i get is
is a lot of what we're struggling with
that
if we just said
i can't save the people who've already
made up their minds to not
go internal and solve this problem
and i just have to focus on people that
haven't solidified their mindset yet
and
the thing that jeffrey canada and again
this is my recollection of what he said
but
that when he really stopped and looked
at what held people back from success
the difference between middle class and
um
the
poverty in in the inner cities was the
number of words they hear by the age of
five and the ratio of positive to
negative and i was like [__] can it
really be that simple like it and
obviously that's that's a
a sort of abstraction what's really
happening which is you're developing the
language centers of their brain
and buoying their spirit
and if developing the language centers
of the brain and booing one spirit is
all you have to do but you have to do it
when they're young
it's like can it really be like
i i
i do and don't want that to be true i
don't want to be true because i'm i
don't have kids so i'm just much more
drawn to adults in the plight of adults
but at the same time i want it to be
true because then it really looks
like you could do something
well the thing is that i thought this
was jeffrey canada but maybe it's
another school of thought
the thing is that
to get the kids
i think you kind of do have to also
target the adults because
the kids are never
in a vacuum you know it's very difficult
to actually
because the children at some point have
to be at home and the culture of the
home matters so much it's very difficult
to just intervene
my father actually like his philosophy
was always that when he was running his
poverty programs
his philosophy was always that you try
to holistically
give the whole family confidence so you
try to get
in in any way that you can you try to
get the parents involved in the
education but also involved in their own
sense of purpose and their own sense of
possibility try to help them with job
try to help the kids and and as a unit
they can kind of see a way forward
because even sometimes i think that
there can be resentment
when it is understood that the child has
a different
class possibility than the family there
can be some type of like
um
people can sabotage themselves so i'm
not i'm certainly not an education
expert but my feeling is that it's hard
to extricate children completely from
from the family unit and so
it's a chicken and egg thing how do you
get the kids if the parents aren't
right and had it and then the kids
become the next generation of parents so
it seems like the whole family has to be
taken care of so how the hell do we do
that
um
how much money did you make
i don't think enough to throw money at
the problem but let's um
let's pretend that if if this problem is
solvable with money then
i always tell people if you have a
problem that's solvable with money you
don't actually have a problem
so
um
is this something that we can
i think that it's not it's not
a problem that's solvable with one
person's money
the biggest but even the government's
money like i'm i'm down like let's say
that we give you a a trillion dollar
check is this solvable with a trillion
dollar check
it might be very vastly improvable the
biggest uh
difference i've noticed living in europe
not just in france in germany or
wherever you go
um
having the ability to have high quality
child care because this the state
subsidized child care in france that is
free if you're poor and is
not very expensive uh if you're middle
class
is such that your children will be
getting those words and we'll get a base
level of kind of education that that's
quite sufficient to develop
um the healthcare is free so you have
this kind of
um i don't mean to paint europe or
france as utopia but you do have this
way in which life can never get as
completely
precarious and kind of and kind of tough
and awful as it can get in the united
states just brutalized um in west
baltimore
you don't have that actual kind of inner
city situation where um
where it's just like almost like a latin
american kind of inequality um i think
that that makes a massive difference uh
you know like money a certain level of
money but also the belief that um
that a kind of the society benefits from
having a kind of floor you know that
there is there is a kind of floor that
you below which you can't go um i often
have conversations with friends uh
who are french
and have lived in america and and in my
experiences and theirs it seems that yes
in america you can get a jeff bezos you
can get there you can get really high
there is no ceiling in america um
but there is also no floor and in france
you're not going to get as high as that
but you're also never going to be quite
as degraded um and i think you know that
that's that's a different idea of what
what uh the good society is you know
i put my kids my my kids are in public
school the level of education and the
level of education in the day care
um not just with books but you know the
the meals they receive at school
the the way they learn to eat the way
they learn to be open to flavors i
actually think that matters quite a lot
understanding
how much of the world is accessible and
legible you know in my in losing my cool
i write about
the fact that i didn't know like an
extraordinary amount of foods until i
got to
college and you know i didn't even know
what this kind of typical french bread
called a baguette was
until somebody asked me to go find in
the store and i realized i couldn't find
it because i didn't even know what he
was talking about and it's like a stupid
little thing but it's actually like uh
a way of thinking about something much
larger as a way of thinking about how
much of the world do you inhabit you
know and i think it's you know
i'm just kind of amazed as a parent now
by
how
much we are willing to think
um
the state should not just provide for
you you know
and i know i'm not getting on
i don't mean to go in i'm not even
saying that uh
i'm just saying that there's a kind of
way in which you know and you look at
what happened under coronavirus um
you're throwing away from a pragmatic
level a lot of talent if a very talented
female
elon musk can't work because she's stuck
at home and she has no one to watch her
children i mean this is it just seems to
me that in so many ways we don't provide
possibilities for people to reach their
potential
yeah we'll definitely agree with that
you start getting into
very complicated waters in terms of
and this is interesting
i
this is where we have to run tests and
look at data
so
when you think about
creating what social programs in fact
this is right way to think about it what
social programs give you gives you the
ideal outcome
and
i will say obviously defining ideal
outcome is going to be critically
important
for me creating equal opportunity to
show up and play
that's what
i i value i'm not i'm definitely not
saying that i represent anybody other
than myself but that to me is what is
interesting because i still want to see
[__] go hard on that field like
i am not interested like i need to know
and that was my thing at quest like look
i don't give a [__] if you were in a
gang i don't give a [__] if you sold
drugs i don't care if you've been to
jail it's like
that [__] is what it is
now to beat you up forever about your
past seems absolutely useless to me but
i [__] care a lot about how hardcore
you are about your job like are you
helping the other people around you are
you lifting them up are you trying to be
the best at your job are you pushing
yourself every day because i'm going to
show up and play for you
i want to make sure that you show up and
play for me and i used to take the
hardest job on the line
and then
get everybody else excited right so that
people could see i'll never ask you to
do something i'm not willing to do
myself
that i will do a [__] brutal job and
yet be upbeat be energetic cheer people
on i used to come in early and stay late
i would teach anybody anything they
wanted to know about entrepreneurship
literally anything if they wanted to
build a competitive nutrition company i
would and did teach people how to do
that i was like i will hold nothing back
for me i will teach you everything i
know and in making myself available like
that and demanding that they [__]
come to play to win
not only did the business thrive but
like that group of people
that is the most
fun i've ever had and fun isn't the
right word i'm going to use it for now
that's the most fun i've ever had in
business and the reason i say fun is
i'm not a guy with a big social circle
um i
i'm sort of heads down doing my thing
i'm introverted um i'm all in on on my
own life and what i'm trying to achieve
but at that moment it happened to be i
had to play a team sport and so i had
all these people that i loved and cared
about and i was going to you know
six-year-old birthday parties and um
baby christenings and i mean just like
all kinds of crazy stuff because i'd
become so integrated in the lives of my
employees
it was very very interesting time but
what made me
so fiendish about my relationships with
them was they were hardcore
and it's like that is where
that's what i need to be excited to
create systems it's like i need to know
that there's
that there's encouragement is probably
the right way there's encouragement to
get people like excited to push
themselves and i don't want to be
punitive i want to i want to find a way
to get people amped up
um i think your dad
had
that hard time with you and your brother
and was it charles is that the name of
the the guy that your dad was tutoring
that was my best friend in high school
yeah
so
how did he end up getting you guys
because charles has gone on to do some
pretty interesting stuff
right
yeah he
he um
i the name is charles in the book his
name is carlos in
in real life he went to harvard law and
he um
and uh he has a wonderful career and
family for himself and studied at oxford
and lots of
wonderful things
so how did your dad get you guys to
click over
i mean
i think that um
it's complicated because
it didn't work
my dad what he was trying to do it
didn't really work with my brother
directly my brother completely rejected
education
which was probably also predictable if
you ran this experiment a lot of times
you you make education to be all end all
in your house and like x number of
children will just flat out drop out of
school
which is what like you rolled it back to
my house like i embraced uh and wanted
to
to make my father
i just wanted to do what i saw my
brother was i wasn't the opposite of
what i saw my brother doing because it
made life easier at home for me and
that's probably actually how it began
for me and then you know like i'm sure
you understand this very well
when you start getting good results it
makes you more invested and you like it
so i tried to not get in trouble the way
my brother did i got a good grade felt
good about that saw that my dad was
pleased did it again you know in this
kind of positive reinforcement luke my
brother actually though is is an
interesting story because
he did everything that you're not the
only thing that you could really do in
my house to mess up was to not go to
college he didn't go to college but he
had absorbed the the household that we
grew up in was extraordinarily
um
like uh
intellectual in in a real way in in in
that i mean that if you came to the
dinner table you would have to discuss
ideas and you would have to defend a
position and you would be challenged and
you'd have to articulate it and you
couldn't just mumble a one-word answer
that wouldn't get you
uh that wouldn't work so my brother
actually absorbed quite a lot and you
know he he banged around dead end jobs
but he had a kind of entrepreneurial way
about him since he was a young kid and
he eventually you know
um
in his 30s he sold a startup and he did
you know he didn't he's not mark
zuckerberg but he he did
well enough that my dad
said something that really
struck me as um
beautiful he said that my brother taught
him
um that were there were many other ways
of
making a success of yourself and it's
not because my brother had made a bit of
money but it was because he had built
something he had a vision that he
pursued and he and he saw it through and
he realized it
and
it was a vision that my father
missed he didn't see it at all he didn't
see the possibility that was there and
so it's a form of flourishing
and
that's what he was really trying to
teach us how to do and in his
way of understanding the world the only
way you could reliably flourish was to
have a kind of
education that came through universally
in a traditional way of book learning
but um
but the
the world is there there's many ways to
do it and so
um yeah i mean how do you motivate a kid
you i it comes back to it always comes
back to i think people have to have
confidence in themselves
so now the question is how do you
give somebody confidence or how do you
help them develop confidence
um
as
a parent how do you think about this
with your own kids like you dude you're
so [__] thoughtful
like listening to your book
um losing my cool especially and hearing
how you
redefined yourself
was [__] awesome dude like there's
something about people that can write a
killer memoir and your memoir is [__]
killer um
that is astonishing to me just the the
level of self-awareness and how you're
able to then put that into action so i
have to imagine you'll bring that that
sense of awareness of how you move
around your kids and how you act and
what you say
and as somebody who is very drawn to
chess i'm guessing that you see moves
you know three and four moves out so how
do you think about
being a father and imparting this stuff
to your own kids to make sure that they
walk away with confidence and knowledge
and a path you know to flourish
i'm trying it's quite demanding actually
the kind of attention that my father
gave us
is
something that i've been aware of the
past three months in quarantine where
we've been trying to
um homeschool our six-year-old daughter
for example and i just realized
it made me really appreciate what he's
doing he put
an enormous amount of himself into
our development um
and so what do i do with like yes i i
try to i try to do some of the things
that he did with us
and you know i
i don't you know it's like
it's tough
man really tough
i don't know what you're saying i want
my daughter to succeed but uh
but to live up to my father's model of
of kind of like walking her down that
path is something that i'm still i'm
working on myself to to become that kind
of selfless parent it's really something
and um it's only in retrospect that i'm
now even beginning to appreciate the
scale of the commitment that he lived i
mean to give you a concrete example like
my father
on the weekend i used to think of it as
a kid that on the weekends in the summer
time on any school break i had to study
five six hours a day with my father and
that was a drag as a parent i'm
realizing that he was spending five six
hours of his day
making courses for me and working
through them with me and he could have
been doing lots of other things that i
like to do now that i'm
an adult and i can control my own time
and so it's kind of you know it was a
sobering experience to
to replace my daughter's teachers for
the past three months and to try to
juggle that with also earning a living
and also trying to see friends and do
things that you like and consider you
know it's it's quite a lot
but what i try to do with my daughter is
i try to i try to talk to her
as though her point of view really
matters
and i think that that
already i see that she has a kind of
confidence and she has a kind of way of
thinking that um if i can just get her
to have a work ethic
i think she'll be okay but you know it's
very difficult
you have to want it as well you have to
at some point my father couldn't
actually make me
um
sit in the chair and spend the time
studying he could make life hell for me
and he made it hell for my brother but
at some point
you actually have to want to do it
yourself and you have to you have to see
it through so
um
man being a parent i wasn't expecting
like a
question that
yeah dude
i really thought about having kids it's
one of the things i think i've been most
thoughtful about in my life i put more
thought into that than my career than
just about anything else um and
thankfully i always had like a slight
intuition around just like the the sheer
amount of time and energy that that
would take
and that was one of the things that
really gave me pause was man i like my
life i like my life and in fact this is
this was one of the big things for me so
um
i
was so serious about building a business
and a big business and
um
really controlling my life i had growing
up i had real issues around
people being able to tell me what to do
people being able to tell me what i
could and couldn't have
my parents not being able to afford
things that i wanted and sure a lot of
that is just the the silliness of being
a child
but the problem with authority had
always persisted so
in trying to create a business it was
largely about controlling my life i
didn't like being an employee and
somebody else having control over me i
didn't like not feeling like an adult
which later i would substitute with the
word autonomous i didn't like
i realized that that autonomy is a very
very very important thing for me i need
to be able to control my life and decide
what i do when i do it and all that
so i like really really really poured
myself into the business and when we
were thinking about having kids and i
was i was reading every book that had
ever been made on rearing children and
getting into that and i thought you know
this is interesting
that their proximity there's no
substitute for so at some point you just
have to spend time with your kids
and i thought that would make me feel
like i wanted to be at home
and i want to be at the business growing
the business so
if i don't have a child there's nothing
that pulls me home my wife and i built
the business together so it was like
that was a joint operation with the
woman i love and so i get a lot of time
there and that's deeply fulfilling for
both of us and if i had a kid i would
start to feel guilty about
not being home with the child and
rightly so it's like that is a
commitment that warrants
time
and this is interesting i actually
didn't bring this up for this
topic but uh it becomes a question of
ought how ought i live my life which was
the thing that you said philosophy
posed those questions to you and became
the only thing in philosophy that you
cared about which was how ought i live
my life and i want to hear like if you
have sort of a
idea around is there a universal odd i
certainly want to know the offer
yourself but that that's what it
ultimately came down to for me if i had
kids i ought to be with them i ought to
spend time with them
and i
didn't want
that pulling me away from the beautiful
things that already had my life the
things i was trying to build
and so
on my deathbed i will without question
regret not having children but if i had
kids now i worry i'd regret them now so
that ultimately became the the deciding
factor but to that notion of ought
i'd love to hear more about
your philosophy on life and what matters
and
what the good life is
yeah well the good life um
i think is uh
doing something that you
um
would do if you
didn't get paid for it um and then if
you get paid for it and you have to get
paid for it if you get paid for it it's
the gravy
um
i think that my kind of path to writing
sounds a lot like your path to starting
a business except that i
get paid a lot less for it but uh
it's autonomy it's controlling my day
it's controlling my time it's
controlling my head space is not having
somebody else
controlling my head space and it's
ultimately i think you know
the kind of pride and satisfaction that
comes with
a craft where you enjoy the process i
really enjoy
every aspect of
organizing thoughts getting them onto
paper
eventually having you know that be
laid out by people that care about how
it looks and then having it appear in in
a printed publication that someone can
hold and then maybe a reader reads it
and it says that it resonated in some
way and i'll never get over that feeling
or the feeling of coming by a newsstand
and seeing
seeing a piece of work that was in your
mind now
in the news and i mean those are things
that just fill me with extraordinary
um sense of fulfillment you know
wrestling with words and ideas i i still
sometimes i'm amazed that i can spend my
time that way because i'm quite aware of
how
bad
a job can feel in so many situations and
how it can be something you don't want
to do
so for me that's flourishing that's the
good life that's how i ought to live my
life but then when i think about the way
that you set up the question i think
about someone like jonathan franzen
who's an extraordinarily successful
writer probably
um
much more successful than
he's much more successful than just
about anybody who's going to write is
going to become that's just the fact
and he said
i would never be able to be
what i have become if i had kids i'm
just i'm just i'm certain that i i
regret that i miss that but i had to be
this way to do what i did and you know
that might be true it might be the
tragedy of life that you could have
several paths that would be
quite fulfilling that would provide you
glimpses of flourishing and that there
is not actually a single good life for
you um
so you kind of have to accept that there
would be regrets and trade-offs with any
path you choose
now like that i have my kids
they filled me with something that i
didn't even know i had no idea that i
would want so much before i had it
because i
because you can't really know
something until it's there so i it's
almost impossible the thought experiment
no longer i used to run the calculus
before
my wife gave birth but once once the the
people are there then you realize that
this is the life for you and then the
other life it vanishes and maybe i
publish fewer books and maybe the books
i publish are i've devoted less of my
full attention to them because i'm
running around trying to homeschool my
daughter but but it works out right
it it i for me that's
very much still the good life even if
if there's some type of trade-off that's
a necessary part of the equation
what i love about
that is
the way that you approach it from a true
philosophical standpoint of having read
the great minds and being able to
formulate your own thinking and going
back to like what's happening right now
i think one of the most important things
and
and for me engaging in the conversation
has been about avoiding cowardice
and wanting to actually formulate a
thought not that i have like some you
know secret agenda all of my thinking
has been about the individual it's been
about um businesses and now i'm like
okay but i've i've spent a lot of time
learning how to think and how to process
a problem and can the the process that i
go through can that be useful um and
in your book one thing that i really
really resonated with partly because i
was i was equally enamored with hip-hop
like you were obviously for very
different reasons
but i was
it's interesting so well let me tell you
why i was drawn to it so
um i was drawn to it because i was a
very weak kid
i was physically weak i was emotionally
weak and
it presented it's funny a jewish guy
ended up giving me the key insight into
why i loved hip-hop so much and he said
white music is all about anxiety and
there's no anxiety in
hip-hop and i was like
holy [__] he was like hip-hop is always
it's bravado it's aggression it's
dominance and i was like oh my god like
this is the the ultimate escape from
feeling scared weak frustrated and and
really
just felt and also quite frankly in this
you may understand this more than the
average person i don't even normally
bring this up to people the turn of
phrase
that i as a writer i am obsessed with
words i'm obsessed with words and i for
sure like what is the like maybe
everybody has a gift if that is true i
can just assure you the gift i have is
verbal i have a whatever amount of
energy i put into verbal things i will
get a disproportionate return on that
energy
so
i've always been attracted to words i am
not a synesthete much to my dismay but
for me words have
texture and they have rhythm so like a
certain word like bubble is actually a
bouncy word like i experience it as a
bouncy word i can feel myself sort of
bouncing off the bees and
because of that i can structure
sentences that have a rhythm or that
have a texture or are sharp or staccato
and i never thought about it that just
like i've always had that sense and so
hip-hop is sort of takes that to the
extreme and i came into hip-hop at a
time where they were transitioning from
really simple um rhyming patterns to
like compound syllables and things where
they were rhyming the middle of words
and things and so that was
intoxicating to my mind and then also i
guess the the last piece was it was
so
i love change i'm a changed junkie and
that touched on something it was so
outside of how i was growing up you know
like i could legitimately and i wish it
were any other song right now but it's
like i can recite the lyrics to [__] the
police right that was just i grew up on
nwa i grew up on two life crew run dmc
um
all all of like that that era i got into
oh the um do you know who uh the boogie
boys are
i don't actually oh
oh you because you you're a little too
young you're you're just
enough younger than me that you probably
miss these guys by three or four years
um but they have this song called fly
girl you can find it on youtube i've
checked and
at least where i grew up if kids wanted
to [__] with you they would start
repeating everything you say
and i could shut that [__] down in an
instant because i knew the lyrics to fly
girls so well i could repeat them at
hyperspeed and nobody could keep up so
it was just like the linguistics the
turn of phrase the rhythm the
the like counterculture was different
than anything that i knew it was so
[__] interesting and so i got drawn
deeply into that but anyway the reason i
bring up hip hop is in your book as you
start talking about how you were just
enamored by the philosophy the the
culture of it all the way that it drew
you in and then you got into philosophy
which was [__] hard and it was brutal
but it laid this foundation for how to
think and once you could think for
yourself and generate your own original
thoughts you looked at the lyrics and
the culture of hip-hop very very
differently and i thought that is the
human experience when it's done right
that you go lay a foundation for how to
think and it becomes unpredictable what
you will think after that
um and i'd love to hear more about that
experience and how you think about that
and how you're still pushing your own
knowledge and not sort of getting into
traps of well i thought it before and
therefore it must still be true
well yeah i mean that's a good way of
putting it
it became
that i philosophy and
studying philosophy opened the world and
opened interests
to myself that i didn't know i had and
made me look back at the kind of
didn't make me dislike the music that i
had loved my whole life but it made me
think that the the vision of
what my authentic self was what had been
limited and and and and that i had been
participating in a kind of limitation of
myself my friends and i mean part of
this is because
hip-hop in the 90s was also like a lot
less worldly than it is now and and and
since at least drake um
mainstream hip-hop has had a high level
of anxiety
in
like like uh stolen into it like drake
drake definitely brought a kind of
anxiety that was lacking before
um
in addition to the bravado but you know
there was a kind of street
authenticity authenticity street
credibility that was very much tied up
in your racial authenticity in the 90s
early 2000s
where
to
to realize yourself as a as a kind of
um or this is the way that my friends
and i often thought about it
to keep it real
was to kind of keep it um street in
certain ways and studying philosophy
just made me question the whole basis of
that because and not just philosophy but
literature you know you'd mentioned
bastiewski earlier when we were speaking
i just saw myself and this is what art
can do i saw myself
in
certain russian characters that were
written in the 1800s
that was a realer depiction of some of
my inner states that i had had from
anybody i'd ever met in my town who
looked like me that's not a knock on
other black kids i've since read you
know depictions of myself
and james baldwin who died when i was
six or you know in in in every ethnicity
that you can think of i've discovered
people that can
um
represent
exactly who i am or who i think myself
to be and that's the human condition no
one group
um
owns all the wisdom and and i guess the
way that hip-hop
kind of operated as a secular religion
in the in the 90s culture i grew up and
it made it such that things that were
outside of its purview
were not real or were not authentic or
weren't really applicable to you and so
it had the effect for me certainly of
putting kind of blinders on me and that
i was very much
you know
it would have struck me as absurd
that i would be living in france right
now talking to you because i couldn't
understand why that would
somebody might do that but why would
that have anything to do with me
um
you know i've gotten pushback with that
my first reading for losing my cool i
was in atlanta reading and and and uh of
all people like killer mike showed up
and he was just in the crowd and you
know he was very um he was cool as hell
in the crowd he was pushing back in the
q a and he was saying i tend to agree
with much of your cultural critique but
i just don't think that what you're
talking about is hip-hop culture you're
talking about street culture
and you know i i've thought about that a
lot there is a kind of um
overlap between you know there's like
someone like
talib quali
is not who i was
having in mind when i was thinking of
the total like the kind of narrowing
um
pressure that that hip-hop culture can
exert on a young black uh
guy trying to think of himself in the
world
but the the mainstream culture that kind
of like dominated that day you know was
the was the vision of of
um
of blackness is necessarily
necessarily only being at home in the
street
yeah that that's a long way that's a
long way to answer your question i hope
that you know i hope that made sense
it definitely makes sense and i'm
certainly not tense at all about long
answers um this is
this is such an interesting topic it's
not something i i ever really
um i didn't think a lot about like and
and i'm not sure
why i never
really thought about it um but obviously
what's going on now is
um
begging a question of how do we think
about the problem how do we how do we
lay a foundation to process through this
i don't think anybody has the answers
right now i wouldn't expect anybody to
but
if we're thinking well about the problem
then we will be able to work our way to
a great solution and have the beautiful
society on the other side of it
if our thinking if the foundation upon
which or the way in which that's a
better way to say it if the way in which
we think about any problem is
malfunctioning then the solution we will
get to will be a broken solution
and
with
with the like critical moment that this
is where we could have this beautiful
outcome or we could have a [__]
horrendous outcome it's like
man i want to make sure that the way
that we think about it and so reading
your books because i'm reading them now
in the middle of this right i'm i'm not
reading them you know five years ago
where it may have been oh that's like
really interesting but
up a pro of nothing whereas now i'm like
[__] this is like
this is so important how we define
identity how we think about who we are
how who we think we are is malleable and
it changes and so how do we how do we
begin to think about this and
also like
the way that you defined your ideal
outcome like i i am about it that that
is literally you've said it better than
i could ever hope to say it
but that's
because i have been in my own life i
have obviously been you know that this
is water for me as being the majority
being a white kid especially in tacoma
jesus it's like you can really take it
for [__] granted there right but
there have been so many times in my life
where i've been the minority so whether
that was when i was big brothering and i
was in the like in one of the worst
school districts in america um whether
that was um at quest in the first year
where it was
it was god man i mean what was the
company
80 hispanic i mean it was just like
massively massively hispanic and
being in those positions it wasn't like
i i used to think of it in very jokey
terms and that could be because i was
just blind to it that it's never been a
problem for me so i didn't think about
it but i never thought myself better
because i was white i i was so um
mercenary i was like who the [__] is the
smartest person here who can answer this
question because i know my limitations i
am so i don't a long time ago almost 20
years ago i realized to feel good about
myself and get rich i had to stop
worrying about being smart and i had to
just start saying i'm the learner i'm
the learner that's it i'll learn from
anybody i don't give a [__] like whoever
has the right answer i want to hear from
you i will sit at your feet i will um i
will gladly look up to you and and
praise you no matter who you are i need
that information and it was like it was
like that it was like this i need to
know like you have some secret that you
can cause my [__] house was on the
line i didn't have time to worry about
being right i only had time to find the
right [__] answer and so it was like
who's got it i don't give a [__] so and
look
so anyway i de
i guess deluded myself into thinking
that everybody was as mercenary as i was
and just wanted the [__] right answer
and wanted like the the smart [__] like
somebody speak up somebody knows that
somebody understands this i don't
[__] understand it so give me the
juice
so anyway now in this moment where it's
like
there there is going back to one of the
first things we talked about the
intoxication of rage that there really
is an underlying problem that there are
people for whom society is not working
and what the [__] do you expect them to
do now i don't think that it is it
serves them certainly long-term does not
serve them to
riot to loot to be violent i don't think
it serves people to get rid of the
police i think that would be a [__]
catastrophe but
i get the rage i get how powerful rage
is i get how from an evolutionary
standpoint that [__] is useful and so
it's like it is a tool don't be
surprised if people are reaching for it
but now i'm like
but how do we get to the other side to
the beautiful outcome
it's interesting how you put in terms of
being mercenary and just seeing how
you can benefit through
cooperation or through
seeing potential in everybody i guess
it's a kind of
interesting i mean if society worked as
as as as raw capitalism or as sports do
where it just
tries to locate talent wherever it is
and with an eye towards maximizing it
that would kind of go a long way
towards alleviating some of these
problems i imagine but when you when
people hear you say that they're going
to hear fingernails on a chalkboard
right so and there is there is something
in that that's crazy and so my thing is
okay the part in there that's crazy is
um thomas soul i know you know who that
is um he says
no no the the market just puts a price
on discrimination if you're willing to
pay the price for discrimination then
you can discriminate and i thought whoa
that's so true
like even in apartheid south africa you
had people that were hiring more blacks
than they were allowed to by law
because they're like well i can get this
done for cheaper so of course i'm going
to do that
and
there there are parts of this puzzle
that the market
forces will do you well
um but then there are parts where this
is going to fall down and i can tell by
the way that i'm speaking that i don't
have a full grasp on
where this
actually goes awry
but
if people
here here's what i think people have to
understand
there's two parts of this there is the
the human
brain's ability to process raw data
quickly is not evenly distributed
but it's
not unevenly distributed across
races okay so you're gonna find
what what i define as genius the ability
to process data quickly raw data quickly
you're going to find that everywhere
doesn't matter where you look
but
worldly knowledge is also not evenly
distributed
so my thing is okay well wait a second i
get this person they've got raw
potential for [__] days and you're
telling me all i have to do is point
them at a an educational paradigm and
they can become a beast like but if you
just look at the state of something as
it is today
then
historic inequities will carry forward
forever because you pass on this
non-useful mindset now if i could clone
your dad
a hundred thousand times and put him
into all these families that to me is
it's a non-sequitur because it's not
real but it's like that actually would
in my estimation solve the problem it
would take a generation but it would
solve the problem because you would find
all the people who could process that
data quickly enough they they what i
call meeting minimum requirements okay
there are people that are not smart
enough they will never be helpful it
will always be a problem for them and my
[__] heart breaks because they didn't
do anything but they just won't ever be
able to cobble together a useful mindset
um
but man if you could light those people
on fire then you would get a radically
different world because oh god you said
this in your [__] book oh please do
you remember the quote where you're
talking about if the p the the school
that you played basketball for very
briefly do you know what i'm talking
about
yeah yeah
we're
when i was saying that when i realized
how they were approaching the game of
basketball is there you talking about
yeah do you oh god i'm gonna [__] this
up you said it so well um i'll give you
the starter and then i'll let you go it
it is you said they're they were so
ferocious they played like their life
dependent on it and i had this feeling
that if they were as obsessed with
curing cancer or um solving oh god
what'd you say uh immortality the way
that they are about basketball they
would actually solve those problems and
dude i reckon you want to talk about
something i recognize the human
condition in that [__] statement
yeah no you're absolutely your memory is
actually
that was basically verbatim actually
um yeah i i really you know it was it
was i was 16 or 17.
this was in the 90s the team that was
regularly the number one team in america
and i was working out with them
wondering if i wanted to transfer and
play with them
and i would have been at the low level
of
the level that could have been on the
team whatever but it just i had a
profound
revelation that what my father was
trying to show me was making sense and
that
i guess i just couldn't
picture
that kind of effort towards something
where
statistically so few people could ever
make something out of it and i imagine
that so many of them if they approached
studying like that could get to yale
could do lots of stuff you know because
that's actually that's like that kind of
effort would pay off much better if
applied differently
um
but it's about exposure i mean what do
you see when you're going
the conversation is interesting because
we keep coming back to a few key points
and one of the things that i think um
conditions these outcomes uh and and
what was tragic for me in the book that
i that i mentioned is that the number
one player in the nation
at one point was on the team anthony
perry and then when i got to georgetown
he was on the team at georgetown he was
a top recruit and by the end of
georgetown because of the vicissitudes
of fate or whatever he didn't even get
drafted you know
and that was just the end of the road
and all of that effort
led to an outcome that i found kind of
tragic
and i just felt that yeah
you know exposure if
what you see in some of these social
contexts is that the only way
that your effort can be rewarded is by
putting into a very few kind of pursuits
and it never is
even shown to you that uh
that you could apply that kind of
tenacity in other ways that would that
would be much more
um
high
high yield for you you know they would
they would be much more likely to be
high yield um
yeah i don't
i don't know
that one that is one of those things
that haunts me so
when you look at somebody like
schwarzenegger
and do bodybuilding is hard i don't know
if you've ever like really gotten
serious about weights that [__] hurts
and it hurts a lot and it takes so much
consistency it's inhuman
um i did 100 burpees before this
interview so i was proud of myself for
that
and rightly you should be that that is
uh it's actually that's actually pretty
hard um i wouldn't want to do a hundred
burpees i'll be very honest um
what i find interesting though is
basically every other bodybuilder um
has been unable to transfer that to
other areas of their life but it is to
get onto the the mr olympia stage it is
an inhuman amount of effort consistency
even even if they're taking just insane
amounts of steroids it doesn't matter
you can't inject yourself with steroids
and get big you have to inject yourself
with steroids and then work out like
your life [__] dependent on it and
these guys do it for years and years and
years and years and years it is
unbelievable but they don't ever
transfer it to something else
and that that is haunting to me and the
only thing that i can make sense of is
desire
so when you were describing the
basketball team and how obsessed they
were i was
inspired i was getting excited and i
don't know that that's what you wanted
me to take away from that description
but i was like dude i aspire to be that
monomaniacal and just like when i set my
sights on something i just am an
unstoppable
machine
who
who truly plays like my life depends on
it and my thing is that is why no one
predicted my success because i had to
learn how to do that
and there are i'm sure there are things
in your life realizations you've had
things you've done that you really and
you're like i want to tell everybody
about this because if they would embrace
this truth which has nothing to do with
thomas chatterton it has everything to
do with being a human
they would radically change the outcome
of their lives and for me realizing that
desire is a process was one of those
things that you could start with no
desire today and over the next six
months build a raging inferno of desire
i i tell people how to do it all the
time most people don't do it
but how do you do it
so
people expect to turn inward and find
something that they already want so
badly that they can't see straight
because they hear stories about you know
the basketball player knew he wanted to
be a basketball player at four years old
or something and they think oh [__]
bummer me i didn't have that thing but
that's not really how the human
condition work what probably happened to
that four-year-old is
they wanted to impress their parent or
their neighborhood or they were enamored
by somebody they saw on tv and one of
their uncles said oh my god that person
is amazing and i aspire to be like them
and they were wearing jordans or
whatever so that kid's like i want to be
admired the way i want my uncle to look
at me the way he looks at jordan and so
what they really wanted was something
very real very visceral and it happened
so young and so early that they didn't
realize what they were really doing so
once you realize oh i'm going to turn
inward i'm not going to find anything
like glowing ember of desire i'm going
to turn in there are things that i'm
more interested than others cool so
everything starts as an area of interest
now as you engage with that area of
interest some things will give you more
energy than they take if they give you
more energy than they take that's going
to be the area that i'm going to say
here's where we're going to be able to
build a raging inferno of desire so okay
cool you have something where there is a
natural reaction to it so if you
naturally don't react even a small blip
to anything okay maybe i can't help you
but you've got this natural blip there
now you're going to go down the process
of gaining mastery because dude this
this is where people [__] fall off
failure to recognize this one thing
breaks everything down
passion is like love love cannot be
unrequited then it's just obsession and
it's it's a dark energy it doesn't feel
good to love somebody to ache for them
and they don't ache for you back it's
[__] gnarly i've been there
but to to long for somebody who longs
for you it's a light energy it buoys you
up it feels so [__] good it gives and
gives and gives it is unreal to to love
somebody to the core of your being is
one of the greatest joys life will ever
[__] give you it is extraordinary and
is why most people probably should have
kids because to get into that sort of
beautiful relationship is [__] joyful
i get it now i happen to have that with
my wife so i know it to the [__] ends
i know what that's like it's amazing now
it is because it is reciprocated that is
[__] awesome skill set is like that
if you build a skill set that does not
have tangible real world outcomes that
allow you to serve not only yourself but
somebody else it will never [__]
matter but if you found this thing that
gave you a little bit more energy than
it took and you go down the process of
gaining mastery getting so good you
can't be [__] denied and there are
real world consequences to that skill
set
now all of a sudden you're out there
doing some rad [__] that affects people
in a way that matters to you with a
skill set that is unique to you that you
worked your ass off to build and now it
lets you do things think about your
[__] dad think about how he feels
about carlos or how he feels about you
or the countless other kids that he
touched and is like [__] man i put
myself in a closet with a flashlight and
i learned you haven't even mentioned
here he had ten thousand [__] books
in in like a normal house when i think
about having ten thousand ten thousand
books a lot of [__] books that's
bigger than most book stores so it's got
ten thousand books
it's [__] unreal and so he's poured
his heart and soul into these books
but he's actually which is why of course
he spent five to six hours with you
because he's like [__] man i worked so
hard to do this and now it's gonna have
real work consequences think about how
proud he is about what you've done and
put out and when his other son [__]
sells a business he's like oh my god
it worked you know what i mean like how
[__] good would that feel so my thing
is he's
probably more interested especially now
if he was still young he'd be more
interested in helping the next kid
because he sees holy [__] this works and
i'm actually able to do something that
has these incredible outcomes and i'm
like now if you attach meaning and
significance to that okay when i was 18
i wanted to be a rich film director
because i like movies movies are rad i
want to tell movies yeah that's cool but
it was really about getting rich now
once i said holy [__] i've worked in the
inner cities i've seen these
extraordinary humans who will do nothing
with their lives but i can actually do
something my unique skill set about all
the things i had to do to get control of
my mind how i've learned about business
how i've learned about story you put
them all together and now i can [__]
hit an 11 year old kid with this story
like yoda [__] changed my life i'm
not joking so to give another kid that
kind of [__] that's going to change
their life now i'm [__] hyped so i
think about and i i feel bad saying his
name so i don't say his name anymore
because i don't want to [__] throw
him out there but the kid that i big
brother for for eight and a half years
terrifying story i'm so heartbroken that
i didn't realize what was happening to
him
but
i i decided i decided to build the
desire i needed to see this studio
through that i had to say i [__]
failed this kid
now that was a decision i didn't used to
think of it like that i used to think oh
my god i showed this kid that somebody
loved him and when i set about building
the studio and i realized the odds are
so stacked against me i'm risking my
fortune to do this like what the [__]
why am i doing this i knew i needed a
why i need a desire i needed to want it
so [__] badly that i was going to
push through any [__] obstacle that
got in my way so okay how do i do this
i'm gonna take the kid that i big
brothered for and i'm going to
like put this at the center of my life
and i'm going to remind myself of how
much more i could have helped him and
done for him if i hadn't been
as ignorant as i was back then and not
seeing what was happening and not
knowing how to empower himself i didn't
know how to empower myself so now that i
have all of that
can i
like
save that next kid and make sure that i
don't fail another person like i failed
him and so now it's like it's i've said
it out loud so many times but it was a
conscious choice of how to marry purpose
to this skill set that i had built but
it was it was all like it started as an
intellectual exercise of marrying this
thing it was real right but i reframed
that story i associated it with
impacting somebody at that age of
imprinting and then after i don't know
probably two and a half three no more
three three and a half years of deciding
okay cool i need to tie that i need to
really rethink about this and and make
it emotional i recorded this video um
called my master plan why why i'm doing
what i'm doing
i promise you there was nothing
performative in that video whatsoever i
was completely caught off guard but in
that moment i i really cried i was
really upset because i realized [__] i
had taken this intellectual thing about
how i'd failed this kid and i had made
it emotionally real through this process
of marrying this purpose to the skill
set that i had built of fanning these
flames of saying by leveraging the skill
set i can really have this kind of
impact and like thinking about it
telling other people about it
reinforcing in my own mind and then it
became real because that's how the human
mind works
and so i'm like [__] man it's exactly
what i did back at quest to marry my
desire for a nutrition company with my
desire to save my mom and my sister put
them together it becomes this emotional
thing anyway it's a lot of [__] words
people are here to hear a lot more from
you than they are for me
but
that's how you build desire
man i mean
i need to keep that conversation going
with you because building desire i think
is the secret to
happiness in what you're pursuing is
work but it's also the secret to
fulfilling relationships with your
spouse with your kids with your with
your
refueling re-channeling and re-imagining
um
is
is is actually
it's one of life's most important
questions
i i will go so far as to say it's the
most important if you want to be
effective
yeah i
that's it's interesting what you say no
i mean
that's like something that i've just
been
blessed in my career not to have to
i haven't had to
make myself desire
um
writing i guess it was something that
it's the it's the
question that you proposed about whether
you
have a requited love or an unrequited
love writing was something that
i didn't have to think very hard about
falling in love with but when you think
about how you make meaning in life
beyond just your work you have to keep
uh finding new ways to to light the fire
of desire that's really deep what you
said
thank you man
well dude i will let you go i cannot
tell you how much i was impacted by your
books they are [__] awesome you are a
voice that the world needs right now
man
there are a lot of voices out there i'm
sure but i i was i saw you first on
coleman hughes's podcast and i was like
who the [__] is this guy
um
the way that you're approaching this
issue
i think your life experience has just
made you uniquely capable of walking
people through how you think about
not getting trapped by a sense of
identity
it's
amazing
keep doing what you're doing keep
writing and if you ever decide you want
to write a comic book i better be your
first phone call um i am i am i'm ready
dude i am ready uh so
yeah anyway thanks for coming on the
show dude thank you for um sharing the
way that you think with the world it's
rad thank you so much tom you got it
brother all right man take care
everybody
[__] read everything he's ever
written i assure you you will be richly
rewarded and if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care i'm
consciously thinking about every moment
i'm having with my children and and how
are they going to be able to problem
solve and navigate stuff and not shut
down because the problem is not only is
it a problem you get older and not have
had hardships but you have more
responsibilities as an adult so when you
can't stand up you lose more